♪ How the tide rushes in
♪ And covers footprints in the sand
♪ As my hope's erased and carried
♪ Out of my hands
♪ Yet though the ocean with waves unending
♪	 Covers the earth,
yet is there loss after all?
(Door opens)
We've had visitors, Cap'n.
From Wheal Radiant.
Do we wish to sell our headgear?
They didn't waste much time.
- How much have they offered?
- A fair price.
They're decent men.
They know it could happen
to the best of us.
The best of us would have bought timbers.
The men knew the risks.
Did their wives...
..their children?
'Tis the business, Ross.
But no longer, it seems.
- Was that from the mine?
- What?
Your eye.
Oh... No.
My wife took exception to something I said.
(Laughs)
♪ Oh, whate'er drifts from one place
♪ Is with the tide to another port
♪ And there's nought lost beyond recall
♪ Which cannot be found if sought
(Knock on door)
'Ee be coming down to breakfast?
Thank you, Prudie.
Master Jeremy and I will be taking
our breakfast here from now on.
Nay, but the chores is piling up downstairs.
You're mistook, Prudie.
This is a more genteel way of doing, I think.
Master Jeremy and I are gentlefolks, after all.
(Jeremy gurgles happily)
This is well met.
I was just debating whether to write
and offer my commiserations.
- On what?
- Your recent loss.
Or should I say, losses?
And perhaps you've not heard...
Elizabeth and I are engaged.
So, in the grand scheme ofthings,
you appear to be in disarray.
And I appear to have won.
As you say, George,
you appear to have won.
(Horse whinnies)
- When do you expect him?
- Who?
My nephew is not always
the most subtle of men.
Nor the most discreet.
- I'm not sure I know what you mean.
- Oh, don't be coy, Elizabeth!
There's no one here but ourselves.
You will know that I have never married.
Perhaps you think that was an accident?
- Well, I...
- Perhaps I think so too sometimes.
Then I remind myself I've yet to meet the man
who could better me.
It is the better man we long for, is it not?
Sometimes it's not the most convenient man.
But come, let us not pretend we prefer
a Warleggan under this roofto a Poldark!
Of course I'm sorry for his kitchen maid.
But we have much to thank her for.
But one must acknowledge the prior claim.
So we can assume he will return to this house
as soon as he's put his own in order.
Churn, I? I ain't churned since...
Since the maid first come. Showed 'ee what
a dog's gizzards 'ee ever made of it.
Smirk all 'ee like. She'll give 'ee no aid now
with the calves or seeding.
'T'ain't right.
- Where's your mistress?
- Her bed.
- Is she unwell?
- Must be.
- What's this?
- What's it look like?
I can't decide.
Hence the enquiry.
It's been so long since the mistress let me bake,
I've mislaid all my skillage.
It would appear so.
Perhaps you could mislay this...
and bring me something edible.
Oh, you're still here.
Is Trenwith not yet in readiness?
Would you like for me to help you pack?
I thought you should know that
we're selling the headgear of Grace.
The venturers ofWheal Radiant
have offered a fair price.
Do you suppose that she ever seriously
meant to marry George?
Surely it was just a trick
to get you to declare your hand?
I've no idea what she intended.
Still, it worked, did it not?
She got what she wanted.
Demelza, I never claimed to be perfect.
Have I ever asked for that?
Not as I recall,
but perhaps my memory serves me ill,
for I seem to remember we promised
to forsake all others.
I realise...that I betrayed your trust.
Forfeit.
And that your pride is wounded.
Pride?
My pride?
To think I did always look up to you...
..respect you,
revere you as my master
long before you were my husband.
I see that, but...
For it did seem to me,
unschooled as I was,
that you were not like other men.
You had a kind of nobility,
not of birth, but of character.
I was so proud to think
that such a man had married me.
So now to discover that you are
so much less than other men,
or fallen so low because so far...
It is not my pride that is wounded, Ross.
It is my pride in you.
(Door shuts)
Sir John Trevaunance. Unwin Trevaunance.
- Lady Whitworth.
- Her son Osbert?
The Honourable Maria Agar.
- Sir Hugh Bodrugan.
- His brother Robert.
William Hick. Mr and Mrs Alfred Barbery.
Ray Penvenen. And his niece, Caroline.
George Warleggan
to marry EliZabeth Poldark!
I could have sworn her interests
lay elsewhere.
But plainly a lady may not always have
what her heart desires.
(Chuckles)
- (Jeremy grunts)
- Jeremy!
Demelza.
We cannot continue like this.
If you could at least see it from my perspective.
Soon you'll be asking me
to see it from Elizabeth's.
- Hardly.
- Course, it's no mystery.
Bet she can't wait to have you installed
in her house. Or in her bed.
Demelza...
Indeed I do suspicion
that's exactly what her letter says.
- What letter?
- It came about an hour since.
She's doubtless wondering what's keeping you.
Truly we wonder ourselves, don't we, Jeremy?
Wheee!
May I see it?
It's in the library.
On your pillow.
(Jeremy grizzles)
I may be out late tomorrow night.
I'm going to Truro.
And I'm unsure as to when I'll be back.
Why don't you just say it, Ross?
"I'm going to Elizabeth."
The letter was not from her.
Of course not.
Here. Read it if you wish.
Richard Tonkin has been released
from debtors' prison and wishes to see me,
no doubt to ask if I can assist him the way I did
Harry Blewitt when Carnmore collapsed, but...
..as you know, I have no money to spare.
It's a pity. You'll miss the Bodrugan party.
That's the least of my regrets.
Demelza...
..I would never...deliberately hurt you.
- You of all people must know that.
- Must I, Ross?
So I'm to assume that you inflict pain
by accident without a second thought?
In the moment, I admit it,
there was no thought of you.
Or ofthe pain I might have caused.
It was as if I was possessed.
Of course! No fault of yours.
Just a greater power,
- and you and her helpless to resist!
- In a way, yes.
Perhaps I might have hoped for some...
understanding, knowing you as I do.
Knowing me to be kind
and simple and giving?
Would you like me to throw myself
off Hendrawna cliff
so that you might bury me at your own
convenience and wed again at your leisure?
I don't blame you for your anger,
but how does it serve us now?
Serve us?
How did you serve us?
How does this...serve us?
Judas, what happened?
Pots all scattered to Jodes!
Clear this away.
GEORGE: Lavish, ofcourse.
No expense spared.
After all, how often does a man get married?
From the lady herself?
No doubt anxious about some detail
oftrimming or confectionery.
Will you excuse me?
ELIZABETH:
My dear George.
I am writing to request the smallest offavours:
a postponement of our wedding.
My dear. I cannot make head nor tail
ofyour letter.
What can you mean by it?
George, I beg you.
Try to understand my position.
These past few days,
it has dawned on me how rash I've been.
Plunging into this marriage, such haste.
It does not look seemly.
And you tell me this a week before the wedding
when all the guests are invited?
But did we not agree that this would be
an entirely private wedding?
A few of my closest friends
would be hurt to be excluded.
George, I have promised to marry you
and look forward to beginning
our life together at Cardew.
But I feel it would not be fair to either of us
to marry in haste.
Is this anything to do with Ross?
Why would you think so?
Is it?
No. That is, obviously he does not favour
the arrangement.
- Has he been here?
- He called.
And he is behind this change of heart!
I knew it!
No! It is my own delicacy.
Seeing him reminded me
how soon it is since Francis died.
I beg you not to be angry with me.
I...want to be indulgent...
..both before and after our wedding.
It's a bitter disappointment to me.
But I will try to agree to your wishes
ifyou will promise me one thing.
- Yes?
- That you name another date today.
Oh...
No... I cannot.
Come, my dear, let us compromise,
so that both of us may get something
from the arrangement.
Grant me the consolation of being able
to fix a date - a month from today.
- So soon?
- What is there to wait for?
What do you imagine will happen
in the meantime?
I do not know.
Can I rely on you, Elizabeth?
Very well...
a month from today.
- You would not!
- I would, EliZabeth. And so would you.
DEMELZA: Give mybest to Elizabeth.
Was it not clear? I'm not going to Trenwith.
No, Ross. To Truro, that's right.
I remember.
Servant come from Werry House.
Sir Hugh begs to know
if you will attend the party.
Oh, Judas, I forgot to reply to his invitation.
Erm...tell the servant we sincerely regret that
Captain Poldark has been called away.
Although...
..Mistress Demelza
would be delighted to attend.
(Carriage approaches)
Finally.
- Compose yourself, Elizabeth.
- (Clears throat)
What shall I say? How should I proceed?
With resolve, girl!
'Tis no easy thing you contemplate.
'Tis for you to dictate the terms!
- You have more to lose.
- (Footsteps approaching)
Oh, my dear. I had to come.
When I heard you postponed the wedding,
I knew at once what was behind it.
Oh, my goodness! Elizabeth!
Elizabeth! Oh, whatever's the matter?
Oh, Elizabeth!
Ross.
I don't recall seeing that black eye.
Was it from the rock fall?
Must have been. Where are you headed?
I've been summoned to Trenwith,
I imagine to treat Mrs Chenoweth.
How's Demelza bearing up?
After the disaster?
She was a godsend that day.
I know I'm preaching to the converted, but...
You've married a remarkable woman.
Indeed.
- And where are you bound?
- Truro.
To Meet Richard Tonkin.
Though I fear he wants to tap me for a loan.
Shall we meet later? Take supper?
Or would you prefer to dine with Demelza?
Let's sup together.
I know what 'ee be thinking.
"What's good for the gander..."
I don't blame 'ee, maid,
but no good'll come of it.
It's no cause for alarm.
Mrs Poldark has a fragile disposition.
Doubtless she's been under some strain.
Did she say she's postponed her wedding
to George Warleggan?
- Indefinitely?
- For a month.
Give her these powders.
- I'll call again tomorrow.
- Thank you.
(Cries oftraders)
- Tonkin.
- Ha! Captain.
- Good to see you at liberty, sir.
- I'll not forget your kindness.
When hard times come,
many friends fall away. You did not.
But your own affairs...
- Do not prosper.
- So I hear.
You'll be wondering why I asked to see you.
(Low chatter)
Ah! Mistress Demelza!
You ventured to trust yourselfto my care,
and lef your husband by the fireside!
Indeed I did, sir.
I decided it was not the weather for firesides.
- Or husbands.
- (Laughs heartily)
Now, where have they put you for the night?
Ah, yes! The red room!
Two years ago, you advanced Harry Blewitt
the sum of£250.
And believe me,
I regret I was unable to do the same for you.
It saved him from debtors' prison.
He was able to rearrange his finances
and start a small boatbuilding venture.
He's had his fill of mining. I don't blame him.
When I left prison, he invited me
to become his partner in the business.
Our venture at present is small,
but we have high hopes.
Of course, ifwe had more capital,
progress would be swifer...
I must stop you there.
If you're looking for investment,
you've come to the wrong man.
(Laughs)
Investment? Dear me, no, sir.
That isn't it at all.
- It's good of you to invite me, Sir Hugh.
- I don't know why I do!
You've tripled your income in six months!
'Twas a moderate investment when we set out.
But with the war...
..demand has gone sky high and now...
You've the makings of a first-rate business.
And you too, sir. If you choose.
(Jaunty folk tune on the fiddle)
(Laughter and chatter)
(Chatter dies down)
Mistress Demelza!
What a sight for sore eyes!
Perhaps you'll introduce me to your friends?
Oh, by all means.
- Surely you jest?
- On the contrary.
She was a scullery maid!
Then you should find her
all the more eager to serve.
Oh, come, man,
I'm in sore need of entertainment.
So you wish me to heap further ignominy
on Poldark?
By debauching his wife. Precisely.
Come, I'll introduce you.
Mistress Demelza.
Is Ross not here?
He's been called away on business.
Where is Elizabeth?
- She has family matters to attend to.
- Hm, I can imagine.
May I introduce Mr Tankard?
Your servant, ma'am.
He's a little shy and barely knows a soul.
- Perhaps you'll take pity on him.
- Oh, perhaps I will.
- Do you dance, sir?
- I could be persuaded.
Mistress Demelza,
know our friend Margaret Vosper?
Mistress Ross Poldark.
Ma'am.
I believe you two ladies
have something in common.
- I believe we do.
- And what would that be?
Both devilish pretty women
who've only got to crook their finger,
the men come running!
I had no idea there were so many
handsome men in Cornwall!
It's fortunate for you that
you need not fear the competition.
(Sir Hugh laughs)
I buried several husbands
and serviced countless more.
I never see the point in beating about the bush.
If you have a fancy for someone,
go up and ask them.
Myself, I prefer to take time
making up my mind.
Even if it do seem like beating about the bush.
I'd sooner do that than get scratched
or worn on every bush I see.
And does your husband share your delicacy?
- Shall we dance, sir?
- Mistress Poldark.
Oh, Captain McNeil.
What a happy coincidence.
May I escort you to supper?
Now you mention it,
I do have something of an appetite.
And I'm a great believer
in indulging such a thing.
Pray excuse me, sir.
You may reclaim me presently.
My dear, I would speak with you.
Oh, I... I do not feel strong enough...
Elizabeth, don't be afraid.
I understand your feelings.
They're quite natural,
after all that has happened.
What...can you mean?
I sympathise more than you think.
You wonder
how you can give your hand to George,
when your heart is committed elsewhere?
Yes.
But...more than that...
There can be no more than that, my dear.
You must let him go. He would want you to.
- I do not think so.
- But I know that he would.
And who can say better than I?
As his sister...
he is dearer to me than almost anyone.
I know he and George
were enemies at the end,
but Francis would want you to be happy.
And if George is your choice...
..I believe you would have his blessing.
And yours?
And mine.
Here.
(Laughs)
(Demelza gasps)
(Both laughing)
(Cheering)
My dear life! I'm so hot, I could faint.
- 'Tis fortunate you have someone to catch you.
- (Laughs)
And now...I have some sad news.
Tomorrow I leave to rejoin my regiment.
Oh, I think I shall weep.
So, I wondered, as a special favour tonight...
would you consider...
..calling me Malcolm?
And, in return,
you'll be wishing to call me Demelza?
'Tis a very pretty name.
What does it mean?
Well, my mother once told me that,
in the old Cornish tongue,
it means "thy sweetness".
I would rather it meant "my sweetness".
It's very close in here.
Shall we take a breath of air in the garden?
(Low conversation)
(Knock at door)
Well? Did he fleece you like a footpad?
No. He showered me with blessings.
The debt repaid in full...
or a share in a profitable business.
That's excellent. What will you do?
Iftruth be told, I'm half-tempted
to follow your lead and enlist.
What, now, when things are looking up?
Surely, you've too much to keep you here?
Yes. You would think so.
But...?
When are our choices ever straightforward?
Are you cold? May I fetch your wrap?
I have none.
I'm glad of it.
I know a better way to warm you.
You're most attentive, Malcolm.
Surely, you cannot be short of attention?
Everywhere I look, men are snarling over you.
I fancy they do not suit you as well as...
As well as...?
Ever since I met you, I've wanted to do that.
I hope you are not disappointed.
On the contrary.
You've given me an appetite for more.
We should return to the party.
Can you not give me a word
of encouragement before we go?
Surely, you've had enough already?
But will you not give me something to hope for?
Later tonight?
Which is your room?
I'm not well acquainted with this house, but...
..I think Sir Hugh called it the Red Room.
I know it.
Thank you, my sweetness.
Thank you.
- You seem distracted.
- Do I?
- Despite your good fortune.
- (Chuckles)
- Is all well at home?
- Yes.
Well, no.
Demelza and I... (Sighs)
Let us just say that attachments
are complicated, as you well know.
Your cousin-in-law may agree.
Elizabeth?
It was she I was called to attend at Trenwith.
A fainting fit. She's postponed her wedding.
She has?
Are you certain?
Clearly, the thought of marrying George
Warleggan was more than she could stand.
Did anyone see you?
I hope I know how to conduct an ambush,
my darling.
- So...you leave tomorrow?
- At noon.
And I shall not see you again.
You shall, if you wish.
You may write to me, at Winchester.
- Malcolm...
- My angel?
- Are you kind?
- Immensely.
Then I beg you to bear with me, to understand
why I led you to believe that...
- It is on account of my husband.
- Don't think of him.
- He has betrayed me with another.
- Is he insane?
- So I thought that I should do the same.
- Most assuredly.
- Please, please, just hear me out.
- Have I told you how beautiful you are?
I begin to realise something about myself.
Call it weakness, if you will,
but I cannot give myselfto any man...
- You can.
- ..except my husband.
I am bound to him. I wish it were not the case...
My angel...
It does you credit to be so delicate.
But think for a moment of me...
who's been looking forward
to this...encounter...
..as a mortal's taste of heaven.
Your duty now is not to your husband...
..but to me.
(Grunts) Malcolm, please...
(Gasps) Malcolm, stop.
Stop! Malcolm!
Stop!
I like a woman who knows her own mind.
I thought you were such a one.
My mistake.
(Door opens and closes)
(Breathes raggedly)
Ross, I hate you.
I hate you.
Ross! What brings you here?
A disinclination to go home early.
Well, join us, then, as we drown our sorrows,
eke out the last of our earnings.
- Don't remind me.
- Oh, nay, Ross, don't take it hard.
All of us were willing to work without timbers.
And if it were to do again,
we'd none of us think twice.
You cannot mean that,
after we lost Ted.
Risky work's better than none.
Grace put food on our table.
More than that. She gave us hope.
I'll tell 'ee: were it not that the lode's buried
'neath 30 fathom of rock,
we'd be back down there like a shot.
- You would?
- With Ted's blessing.
- Damn, blast and set fire to it!
- What the blazes...?
SIR HUGH: I believe you're lost, sir.
Your room is on the east side.
Thank you, sir. I know where my room is,
and to whom this one belongs.
- But...no...
- Damn it, sir, she as good as invited me.
Now, just scuttle off and turn a blind eye.
Blind eye? I was going in there, myself.
Don't tell me she invited you!
SIR HUGH: Blast it, sir. You had no invitation.
You thought you'd try your luck.
TANKARD: Blast yourself, sir. I was here first.
I'm the host. It's only right that I have first pick.
A host should yield to a guest.
It is the proper etiquette.
Etiquette be damned!
If you go in there, I go with you.
I don't fancy we'll win her that way.
Suppose we toss a coin?
No one shall say I'm not a sportsman.
- Call.
- Heads.
Tails. Stand aside, sir.
What the devil...?
Well, I've never known a woman
promise so much
and deliver so little.
(Sighs)
- Where's Demelza?
- Out.
- Since when?
- Since she went to Bodrugan's party.
Did she say she would stay the night?
- Did she?
- I don't recall.
So, you've no idea where she is?
I reckon she's as much right
as any to stay out all night.
Which she do.
Demelza!
Ross. Kind of you to come and meet me.
Did you have a pleasant time at Trenwith?
I told you:
I went to Truro to meet Richard Tonkin.
Whatever you say, Ross. Do what you will.
Go and live with her, if you wish.
It's quite possible
her marriage will still go ahead.
No doubt you did your best to prevent it.
No doubt I did.
So, does she love George, then?
No, she does not.
Demelza, I cannot blame you for your anger...
..but if you could bide a while,
have a little patience...
- Patience?
- ..this thing will play itself out, sooner or later.
I see. So, you expect me
to sit and twiddle my thumbs
until you decide whether or not you want me?
It's not a question ofwanting you.
It's a question of not wanting her.
- Do you not want her?
- No.
I don't know.
- Sometimes...
- I'm not content to be second-best.
- Have I asked you to be?
- Have you not made me so?
Why am I here, Demelza?
Why do you suppose I'm still here?
I don't know why you're still here, Ross.
Because Elizabeth can't make up her mind?
No.
Because Elizabeth does not want you?
Because she knows George is the better bet?
I came here with good news!
I came here to tell you
that Blewitt can repay the money I lent him.
We can reopen Grace!
Demelza...
(Sighs)
You must take the decision alone.
Aunt?
You cannot wait for him to help you.
I don't understand.
How can he treat me so?
How can he leave things so...up in the air?
And not for the first time.
Exactly.
Once before, I waited for him
to come and see me, and when he did not...
You married Francis.
- And now...?
- I do not know.
He's deserted me.
He tried to stop this marriage,
but offered nothing in return.
He has taken what was not rightly his
and walked away from the consequences.
Why did he have to come?
I hate him for it.
He's left me with only one possible choice.
(Church bells ringing)
I reckon it'll take two weeks to clear the rubble.
And we'll have her up and running again.
What are we waiting for?
I see Ross be not at his cousin's wedding.
Such a pity
that relations with George are so strained
that Ross could not attend the wedding.
If you say so.
Come and sit with me, child.
So, now you're all that remain
ofthe Trenwith Poldarks.
No doubt Warleggan would dispense with us,
if he could.
Oh, you'll hardly see him, Aunt.
Once they're living at Cardew,
why would he even visit?
Elizabeth may come to see her mother,
but, to all intents and purposes,
you are mistress now.
You will visit me often?
Like old times.
Ifwe close our eyes,
it will seem like 20 years ago...
..with Francis and Father still alive,
and Ross riding over every day.
Ross?
Yes.
How different might it all have been.
He must wonder why I sleep here now.
- Perhaps you should tell him.
- That you don't wish to have me near you?
Or that you now find me distasteful,
after the delicate charms of Elizabeth.
(Bell chiming)
ROSS: You'd never think
you almost lost your lives down there.
Well, we've all got to go sometime.
I wish Ted could have lived to see the day.
- You did all you could.
- It wasn't enough.
I wonder ifthe Navy's so desperate
as to need a second-rate surgeon.
The Navy will need all the men it can get,
ifthe war continues.
An auspicious day.
Mistress Poldark should be here.
She's always taken an interest
in our ventures before.
Demelza has business elsewhere.
- You were born for this life, my dear.
- I like to think so.
London is full of beauties,
but you will outshine them all.
Such a privilege
to have Lord and Lady Warleggan to tea.
Oh, have I ennobled you prematurely?
I'm sure the honour will soon be forthcoming.
And how is Cornwall?
Do you see much of Dr Enys?
He attends my mother.
So, he's finally moving in more exalted circles.
I fear not, ma'am. I think
my mother is his only fee-paying patient.
But how secretive you've been.
You announced your wedding so late,
Uncle and I could not attend.
Erm...my wife kept me waiting a while,
until she gave her answer.
Quite right.
Marriage lasts a lifetime.
A lady must be sure
she's making the right choice.
Hm.
Ross! Ross!
Cap'n Henshawe be calling for 'ee.
Can it wait?
There's something he needs 'ee to see.
(Clatter of shovels in distance)
GEORGE: I've been thinking about
our domestic arrangements.
You'll be glad to return home to Cardew.
I had thought so, but...
now I believe I've a fancy
to live somewhere else.
- I can scarce believe it.
- Nor I.
When first I saw it,
I thought my eyes deceived me.
- What does it mean?
- It means...
I'm breaking the habit of a lifetime
and taking a drink.
- (Coughs)
- (Laughs)
(Laughs)
I've something to tell you.
We've reached the tin lode that was buried.
We've been working on it for some days,
and today the lode split.
One half is twice the size ofthe old lode.
(Chuckles) Henshawe says
he's never seen richer ground.
Demelza...
Do you understand what this means?
I'll be able to pay back the interest on the loan.
More than that.
Soon...
we'll be in a position to repay in full.
I'm very glad for you, Ross.
For us.
Do you not see how this changes things?
It will mean notjust survival,
not even a good living...
..but wealth.
After so long,
the very thing we hoped for.
And now it's here.
Has it come too late?
Demelza?